Add transformers blog post (#30)
vespa-engine/blog: _posts/2020-07-02-introducing-nlp-with-transformers-on-vespa.md

---
layout: post
title: Introducing NLP with Transformers on Vespa
date: '2020-07-02'
tags: []
excerpt: We’ve been working a lot lately on evaluating Transformer models in
         Vespa. Here we show how and share a bit on how we view the benefits
         of inference in Vespa.
---

It really isn’t an exaggeration to claim that the field of NLP has been
revolutionized in the last year or so by the introduction of the Transformer
and related models such as the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers (BERT). Indeed, BERT has since it’s release dominated various
leaderboards on NLP related tasks such as [MS
MARCO](https://microsoft.github.io/msmarco/). Extending beyond research, a
growing number of companies have shown considerable interest in adopting these
models for production.

One of the reasons for this is the ease of getting started. This is in large

> part due to Hugging Face and it’s open-source Transformer library. With this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
part due to [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/) and it’s open-source Transformer library. With this
```

library it’s easy to start with any of the thousand or so pretrained base
models, and fine-tune it to a specific task such as text classification,
translation, summarization, text generation or question/answering. This is an
attractive proposition considering that some of these base models are immense,
requiring huge amounts of data and computational resources to train. The cost
of training can sometimes run into the millions of dollars. In contrast, taking
a base model and fine-tuning it requires much less effort, making powerful NLP
capabilities available to a larger community.

Recently it has also become easier to deploy and serve these models in
production. The Transformer library has [added functionality to export models to
ONNX](https://medium.com/microsoftazure/accelerate-your-nlp-pipelines-using-hugging-face-transformers-and-onnx-runtime-2443578f4333),

> allowing for much greater flexibility in model serving since this is largely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allowing for greater flexibility in model serving since this is largely
```

per content node, so with 10 content nodes, the BERT model is running
effectively on 100 data points.

Evaluation of models from different platforms such as Tensorflow, PyTorch,
XGBoost and LightGBM can be freely combined as well, even in the same
expression. To efficiently search for potential candidates one can use WAND.
Recently we’ve also added [approximate nearest
neighbors](https://blog.vespa.ai/approximate-nearest-neighbor-search-in-vespa-part-1/),
giving the option of a highly performant nearest neighbor search which can
naturally be based on textual representation as well.

In summary, Vespa offers ease of deployment, flexibility in combining many
types of models and computations out of the box without any plugins or
extensions, efficient evaluation without moving data around and a less complex
system to maintain. This makes Vespa an attractive platform.

### Ranking with Transformers

For a taste of how to use Transformer models with Vespa we’ve added a small
sample application:
[https://github.com/vespa-engine/sample-apps/tree/master/transformers](https://github.com/vespa-engine/sample-apps/tree/master/transformers).

> In this sample app we use the MS MARCO data set which combines both queries,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this sample app we use the MS MARCO dataset which combines both queries,
```

`AutoModelForSequenceClassification`, and the official conversion script does not
export the additional tensors required for the linear transformation on top of
the base model. The script puts the exported model into the “models” directory
of the Vespa application package where it will ultimately be imported and
distributed automatically to all content nodes.

We also need to create the data feed. As part of evaluating any Transformer
model, text needs to be tokenized. The tokenizer is part of the model as the
model is dependent upon stable tokenization during both training and inference.
For the purposes of this sample app, we have not implemented a tokenizer in
Vespa, meaning that we handle tokenization outside of Vespa. So in the
conversion of MS MARCO data to a Vespa feed, we also use the model’s tokenizer
to generate tokens for each piece of content. This means that when querying
Vespa, we currently need to send in the tokenized representation of the query
as well. In a follow-up post we will show how to port a tokenizer and use that
during document and query processing in Vespa.

Putting these together, we need to decide which fields to index for each piece

> of content as well as how we should compute each result. This means defining a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of content as well as how to compute each result. This means defining a
```

that we’ve decided upon a  sequence length of 128 here to keep sizes small. The
cost of evaluating Transformer type models is generally quadratic in relation
to the sequence length, so keeping them short has significant gains in
performance. This means that we only store the first 128 tokens for each
document. The documents in MS MARCO are significantly larger than that however,
and a common way of handling that is to instead index up each paragraph, or
perhaps even each sentence, for every document. However, we have not done that
explicitly in this application.

We also need to define how to compute each result. Evaluating the model is
fairly easy in Vespa:

```
rank-profile transformer {
    first-phase {
        expression: bm25(title) + bm25(body)
    }
    second-phase {
        rerank-count: 10
        expression: onnx("rankmodel.onnx", "default", "output_1")
    }
}
```

The first-phase expression tells Vespa to calculate the BM25 score of the query
against the `title` and `body` fields. We use this as a first pass to avoid
evaluating the model on every document. The second-phase instructs Vespa to

> evaluate the model named `"rankmodel.onnx"` (the one exported from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
evaluate `"rankmodel.onnx"` (the one exported from the
```

> Transformer library) and calculate the output `"output_1"` with the top 10

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transformer library) and calculate `"output_1"` with the top 10
```

                attribute(tokens){d0:(d1-input_length-2)},
                TOKEN_NONE   # 0
        )))))
    }
}
```

This constructs the input tensor (of size 1x128) by extracting tokens from the
query or the document based on the dimension iterators. The values `input_length`
and `document_length` are themselves functions that return lengths of the input
and document respectively. Note that this function in the actual sample app is
a bit more complex to cater for documents shorter than 128 tokens. After
`input_ids` is calculated, it is fairly trivial to find the other two.

One consideration is that Vespa evaluates the model once per candidate. This
means that the latency is directly proportional to the number of candidates to
evaluate the model on. The default number of threads per query is set to 1, but
[this is easily
tuned](https://docs.vespa.ai/documentation/reference/services-content.html#requestthreads-persearch).
This allows for lower latency when evaluating multiple candidates. Note that
using a larger number of threads per query might have a negative impact when
handling many queries in parallel, so this is something that must be tuned on a
per application basis.

> So, when it comes to setting up Vespa, that is basically it. To summarize one
> needs to put the model in the Vespa application package under a “models”
> directory, define a document definition and describe how to score each
> document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, when it comes to setting up Vespa, that is basically it - summary:
1. put the model in the application package under a "models" directory
2. define a document definition
3. describe how to score each document.
```

Reviewer: I think a list makes is clearer, but no big deal

After feeding the documents to Vespa, we are ready to query. We use the queries
in MS MARCO and tokenize them using the same tokenizer as the input, resulting
in a query looking something like this:

```
http://localhost:8080/search/?hits=10&ranking=transformer&
yql=select+%2A+from+sources+%2A+where+content+CONTAINS+
%22what%22+or+content+CONTAINS+%22are%22+or+content+CONTAINS+
%22turtle%22+or+content+CONTAINS+%22beans%22%3B&
ranking.features.query(input)=%5B2054%2C2024%2C13170%2C13435%5D
```

Here, the YQL statement sets up an OR query for “what are turtle beans”. This
means Vespa will match all documents that have at least one occurrence of each
of these terms, and rank them according to their BM25 score. The
`ranking.features.query(input)` defines an input tensor that represents the token
sequence of this sentence, in this case `[2054, 2024, 13170, 13435]`. Both these

> input parameters are url encoded. For this query, the top rated result (aptly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
input parameters are url-encoded. For this query, the top rated result (aptly
```

titled “What are Turtle Beans”) receives a positive class probability from this
model of 0.92. This value represents how well the document relates to the
query.

As mentioned previously, we’ve held tokenization outside of Vespa for the
purposes of this post, but we will follow up with another post where we

> implement this within Vespa so that only the textual content of each document

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implement this within Vespa, so that only the textual content of each document
```
